Graphics with Haskell: Gloss
============================

This is the first of two parts on displaying graphics and user interfaces with
the functional programming paradigm, in Haskell.

There are many ways to model an interactive application. In this part we'll look
at the **Model-View-Controller** design pattern (or **MVC** for short) in the
functional flavour. This pattern is very common (accross all languages!) and
goes by many names such as Gloss, Elm architecture, ..., .... A good example
being its common use in structuring Android mobile applications (with Android
Studio).

MVC
===

**MVC** says that an interactive application should consist roughly of three
main parts -- **Model**, **View**, and **Controller**.

* The **Model** is the data and state that we need to keep track of to
    *model* our application. If you're programming a Chess game, the model could
    consist of the state of the board (which pieces are where), the time passed
    since the last player played, whose turn it is, etc...

* The **View** is the definition of how our model

After seeing how we can display some simple text on the screen, let's work on
building a representation of our company. To avoid taking care of positioning
we'll simply display the employees along a circle, making a bigger circle for a
better paid employee.

And now we can add names to them. Let's display them at the top left corner of the circle

To extend our simulation we'll say that the company raises the salary of
everyone that isn't making > $10000 by $250 everyday. It is up to the manager to
keep on cutting the salaries before they run out of money. We'll add the
simulation of money later.

Model
=====

We already have a model: the 101companies datatypes model our company

View
====

The view part describes how the model is displayed to the user.

If we write some function :: Company -> Picture we can display it right away on
a full screen

```hs
main :: IO ()
main
 = display
        (InWindow
               "101companies"     -- window title
                (400, 150)       -- window size
                (10, 10))        -- window position
        white                    -- background color
        picture                  -- picture to display

displayCompany :: Company -> Picture
displayCompany
        = Translate (-170) (-20) -- shift the text to the middle of the window
        $ Scale 0.5 0.5          -- display it half the original size
        $ Text "Hello World"     -- text to display
```

Draw window screen (1280,720), coordinates in the center of screen (0,0)

Gloss
=====

Gloss is a framework for programming graphical applications in Haskell, which
is itself described in terms of the **MVC** pattern.

In Haskell (and other strongly-typed functional programming languages) in
particular, the **MVC** pattern is less loosely defined as usual, and can be
more clearly identified in the code. This is because the we can "strongly"
encode our *model* with types and the *view* and *controller* are simply
functions defined in terms of the model type. Pure functions and user-defined
types get us a clearer distinction between the three.

Controller
==========

When writing a controller, that is, a function that updates the state of the
world, we want to react to both user events, such as mouse clicks, but also to
the passing of time.
Considering this, the controller in gloss is defined with two separate
functions: one to control the time moving forward, and the other to react to
user events.

These two functions are passed to the main `play` function i.e. `play` takes two
higher order functions that control events and time

