---

title: Lecture 2

---

Functions Types, Currying, Partial application, Higher-order functions
======================================================================

All functions have a type, the *function type*:
```hs
length :: [a] -> Int
length [] = 0
length (x:xs) = 1 + length xs
```

The same way we think about the `Either` type constructor, and about the tuple
type constructor `(,)`, we can think about the function type type constructor
(the arrow `->`). They are all type constructors that take two arguments.

```hs
data Either a b = Left a | Right b

data (,) a b = (a, b)     -- pseudo code

data (->) a b = a -> b    -- pseudo code
```

This means that the `(->)` type constructor, when applied to two types `a` and `b`, creates
a new type `a -> b`, where `a` is the input type and `b` the return type.

This beggets the question, what is the type of a function that takes two
arguments? There are two ways to define multi-argument functions.

The first would be to think about functions that receive multiple arguments in a
tuple.
```hs
prepend :: (Char, String) -> String
prepend (c, str) = c:str
```

You could even use it like this `prepend('h', "ello")`, which somewhat resembles
the imperative style function call.

The second option is to have a function take one argument `a`, and return a
function that takes another argument `b` and only then returns `c`.
```hs
prepend :: Char -> (String -> String)
prepend c = (\str -> c:str)
```

And this is the most common way to have multi-argument functions in functional
programming languages. In Haskell, thinking about two argument functions and
functions that return functions is really the same thing.

The most common way of writing the two argument function `prepend` in Haskell,
read "`prepend` is a function that takes *two* arguments of type `Char` and `String`
and returns `String`", would be
```hs
prepend :: Char -> String -> String
prepend c str = c:str
```

The `(Char, String) -> String` version is said to be an *uncurried* function,
while `Char -> String -> String` is said to be *curried*.

An advantage in using *curried* functions is the possibility to partially apply
them.

We can define a new function that always prepends `B` in terms of `prepend` by
partially applying `prepend` (that is, applying the function to a partial number
of arguments)
```hs
prependB = prepend 'B'
```

Partial application is useful in everyday functional programming; A common
example is passing partially applied functions to functions that take functions:
```hs
map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]

-- Given a list of strings, prepend C to them all
prependAll :: [String] -> [String]
prependAll strs = map (prepend 'C') strs
```

In functional programming, functions are *first-class*, meaning they can be
passed as parameters and returned from functions. Functions used in those ways
are said to be higher-order functions

As an end note on function types, notice that the "correct use" of `->` type constructor is enforced by the
kind system, the same way the usage of `Either` is enforced by the kind system.
The kinds of these type constructors are:

```hs
type Either :: * -> * -> *
type (,)    :: * -> * -> *
type (->)   :: * -> * -> *
```

To have a function type we must supply both type arguments to the `->` type
constructor (i.e. `Int -> Char` is a valid *type*), but what happens if we
*partially apply* the type constructor?
```hs
type (->) Int :: * -> *

type FunctionFromInt = (->) Int

type FunctionFromInt Char :: * -- equivalent to `Int -> Char`
```


Laziness
========

<small>This section derives from [A Gentle Introduction to Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/tutorial/functions.html)</small>

Suppose `bot` is defined by:

```hs
bot = bot
```

In other words, `bot` is a non-terminating expression. Abstractly, we denote the
value of a non-terminating expression as _|_. Expressions that result in some
kind of a run-time error, such as 1/0, also have this value. Such an error is
not recoverable: programs will not continue past these errors.

A function `f` is said to be *strict* if, when applied to a nonterminating
expression, it also fails to terminate. In other words, f is *strict* iff the
value of `f bot` is `bot`. For most programming languages, all functions are strict.
But this is not so in Haskell.

As a simple example, consider const1, the constant 1 function, defined by:

```hs
const1 x = 1
```

The value of `const1 bot` in Haskell is `1`. Operationally speaking, since `const1`
does not *need* the value of its argument, it never attempts to evaluate it, and
thus never gets caught in a nonterminating computation. For this reason,
non-strict functions are also called *lazy functions*, and are said to evaluate
their arguments *lazily*, or *by need*.

Another way of explaining non-strict functions is that Haskell computes using
definitions rather than the assignments found in traditional languages. Read a
declaration such as 

```hs
v = 1/0
```

as define `v` as `1/0` instead of compute `1/0` and store the result in `v`. Only if
the value (definition) of `v` is needed will the division by zero error occur. By
itself, this declaration does not imply any computation. Programming using
assignments requires careful attention to the ordering of the assignments: the
meaning of the program depends on the order in which the assignments are
executed. Definitions, in contrast, are much simpler: they can be presented in
any order without affecting the meaning of the program.

Recursion: Inductive Method
===========================

Inspired on [AMD - Teórica 3](http://ctp.di.fct.unl.pt/~amd/lap/teoricas/03.html).

A well defined recursive function does case analysis over its parameters.

The **base cases** are the ones that don't lead to recursive calls of the
function. The **general cases** are those that lead to, directly or indirectly,
recursive calls of the function.

The *inductive method* helps the programmer reason about the logical properties
of the problem to solve:
    * The trivial case should be dealt with trivially
    * The general case should be dealt with by *reducing the problem to a simpler
        problem*
When reducing the problem to a simpler one, assume the simpler one is already
solved, and try to form the result based on that answer. In practice, the
simpler problem is solved by the recursive call.

```hs
fact 0 = 1
fact n = n * fact (n-1)

length [] = 0
length (x:xs) = 1 + length xs
```

Analysing these recursive functions, we note that when dealing with the
**general case** (the non-trivial case), they both *reduce the original problem
to a simpler instance* of the same problem. the `length` function reduces the
original problem `length (x:xs)` to the simpler `length xs`, and the function
`fact` reduces the problem `fact n` to the simler problem `fact (n-1)`.

Assuming the simpler problem is already solved (what is the length of `xs`?), we
can just think about the step to take to the solution, which is add `1` to the
recursive call result.


Recursive data structures
=========================

Data structures can use themselves to define themselves, or in other words,
define themselves recursively. When they do so, they can be called *recursive
data types*.

```hs
data Tree a = Leaf | Node a (Tree a) (Tree a)
```

A `Tree` here is defined in terms of other `Tree`s. A `Tree` of `a`s can be either a
`Leaf` or a `Node` with a value of type `a` and two subtrees.

Recursive data types are expressive kinds of structures and a very idiom in
functional programming. For example, we can clearly express a simple calculator
language through a recursive data type `Expr`.

```hs
data Expr = Const Int
          | Add Expr Expr
          | Mult Expr Expr
```

This way, we can represent numerical expressions in through our datatype:

```hs
-- 5
Const 5

-- 6 * 2
Mult (Const 6) (Const 2)

-- 2 + 3 * 4
Mult (Add (Const 2) (Const 3)) (Const 4)
```

And easily define recursive operations on it:

```hs
calculate :: Expr -> Int
calculate (Const i) = i
calculate (Add x y) = calculate x + calculate y
calculate (Mult x y) = calculate x * calculate y
```

Because of Haskell's laziness, we can even make infinite values of this recursive type.

Write a function that creates an infinite tree of length `n` given `n :: Int`
```hs
infiniteTree :: Int -> Tree a
infiniteTree = undefined
```

What about an expression that infinitely adds `n`?
```hs
-- infiniteAdd 5 <=> 5 + 5 + 5 + ... + 5 + ... + 5 + ...
infiniteAdd :: Int -> Expr
infiniteAdd = undefined
```

One can then write functions to make use of these infinite structures. For
example, a function that given an infinite expression of adding `n`, adds `n`
`k` amount of times (that is, a function that multiplies `n` by `k` through
creating an infinite addition expression).

The most common example of an infinite structure is the infinite list and
operations on it
```hs
[1..] -- [1,2,3,4,5,6,7......

take 5 [1..] -- [1,2,3,4,5]
```

Could you write a generator of infinite lists starting at `n`?
```hs
data List a = Nil | Cons a (List a)

infList :: n -> List a
infList = undefined
```

Type Classes
============

Previously we saw *parametric polymorphism*, and how a function needed to treat the polymorphic
types agnostically, that is, the polymorphic type could be instanced by any type
and the expression would still be valid. A common example is the map function
```hs
map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
map _ [] = []
map f (x:xs) = f x:map f xs
```

In which the elements of the list are treated agnostically -- they could have any
type and this function would still typecheck.

Sometimes, however, we desire a function to be polymorphic over just some types,
for example, a function polymorphic over all types for which equality `(==)` is
defined.

We don't want to define multiple equal functions just with different types,
neither do we want a fully polymorphic function because equality isn't defined
for all types (e.g. the `Expr`s we created previously).
```hs
allEqual1 :: [Int] -> Bool
allEqual2 :: [Char] -> Bool
allEqual3 :: [Bool] -> Bool
allEqual4 :: [a] -> Bool -- how to compare a?
```
That's where *type-class polymorphism* (also known as *ad-hoc polymorphism*)
comes into play. We can define a **type class** which corresponds to a set of
types which have certain operations defined for them, and we can define
*type-class polymorphic* functions which can only be called on types which
instance the said type-class.

Let's define a type class for equality. Any *type* that *instances* this *type
class* `Eq`, or in other words, any *type* that belongs to the *set of types* that
support the equality comparison `(==)`, well, can be compared using `==`.

```hs
      + --- class name
      |
      v
class Eq a where
    (==) :: a -> a -> Bool
      ^
      |
      + --- operation that must be defined for all instances of `Eq`
```

We can then define *type-class polymorphic* functions such as `allEqual`, which
take a polymorphic type `a`, as long as `a` instances `Eq` (`Eq a => a`).

```hs
             + -- Constraint
             |          + -- Function type, where `a` must instance `Eq`
             v          v
            _____   ___________
allEqual :: Eq a => [a] -> Bool
allEqual [] = True
allEqual [x] = True
allEqual (x:y:xs) = x == y && allEqual xs
```

If we then called `allEqual` on a list of `Expr`, it still wouldn't work --
that's because `Expr` doesn't instance `Eq` (how do you compare two `Expr`?)
```hs
allEqual [Const 5, Const 5, Add (Const 6) (Const 7)]
```

To define an *instance* of a type class for some type, we use the `instance`
keyword in the following way:
```hs
         + --- class name
         |   + --- instancing type
         v   v
instance Eq Expr where
 -- (==) :: Expr -> Expr -> Bool
    (==) x y = case (x,y) of
        (Const i, Const j) -> i == j
        (Add z w, Add k p) -> z == k && w == p
        (Mult z w, Mult k p) -> z == k && w == p
        (_, _) -> False

```

After which `allEqual [Const 2, Const 2]` would return `True`.


Type Classes Kinds, Constraints
===============================

Let's begin with this set up
```hs
data Box a = MkBox a

class Eq a where
    (==) :: a -> a -> a

allEqual :: Eq a => [a] -> Bool
```

And now let's revisit *kinds*.
The kind of a simple type such as `Int`, is `*`.
The kind of a type constructor such as `Box` is `* -> *`
The kind of a type constructor applied to a type, such as `Box Int` is `*`.

```hs
type Int :: *
type Box :: * -> *
type Box Int :: *
```

Now imagine there existed a kind called `MagicalKind`, and we could define type operators
that returned types of this kind
```hs
type Magic :: * -> MagicalKind
```
The `Magic` type operator receives a `*` and returns `MagicalKind`. `*` is a
kind, `MagicalKind` is a kind, and their combination through the kind arrow
`(->)` is also a kind.

If we applied `Magic` to some type, say, `Int`, we'd get something of kind
`MagicalKind`.

```hs
type Magic Int :: MagicalKind
```

There are other kinds besides `*` and kinds constructed with `->`. There exists
an important kind called `Constraint`, and there exist type operators that
return types of kind `Constraint`.

Those type operators are defined through type classes. Our `Eq` class has a
kind:
```hs
type Eq :: * -> Constraint
```

Which means that `Eq` applied to `Int`, `Eq Int`, has kind `Constraint`.

It's the kind system that enforces the correct usage of constraints and type classes.
Going back to the set up of this section, how could we create an instance of `Eq` for `Box`?

```hs
instance Eq Box where
    (==) = undefined
```

This would actually not compile! Why? Let's inspect the kinds.
```hs
type Eq :: * -> Constraint
type Box :: * -> *
type Box a :: *
```

When we write `Eq Box`, `Eq` is expecting a type of kind `*`, but we pass it
`Box` of kind `* -> *`!

A correct instance could be formulated as follows
```hs
instance Eq (Box a) where
    (Box x) == (Box y) = True -- We define two boxes to be always equal
```

Now, `Box a` has kind `*`, and so `Eq (Box a)` is correctly formulated.

Finally, let's look at the `Constraint` kind. When defining a type class
polymorphic function, we use the `=>` symbol. On the left side of the symbol we
must have *constraints*, and on the right, *types*. The kind system also
enforces this.
```hs
allEqual :: Eq a => [a] -> Bool
```
This is a correct function definition. `Eq a` has kind `Constraint`, and so it
can comfortably sit on the left side of `=>`. If we were, however, to write
```hs
allEqual :: Box a => [a] -> Bool
```

We'd get an error complaining about how `Box a` should have kind `Constraint`,
but in reality has kind `*`.

Suggested reading: [Type Classes](https://www.cis.upenn.edu/~cis194/spring13/lectures/05-type-classes.html)
